Review of the December
2021 Log4j Event

We write this report at a transformational moment for the digital ecosystem. The infrastructure on which we
rely daily has become deeply interconnected through the use of shared communications, software, and
hardware, making it susceptible to vulnerabilities on a global scale. While the computing industry is maturing,
our ability to handle risk and incidents in our digital ecosystems is not keeping pace. To address this gap, and
to begin driving necessary systemic improvements, President Biden directed the establishment of the Cyber
Safety Review Board (CSRB, or the Board) to review significant cyber incidents and provide “advice,
information, or recommendations for improving cybersecurity and incident response practices and policy.”1
We were honored to take the helm of the CSRB at this critical juncture. To advance the overall security and
resiliency of our digital ecosystem, we applaud the application of this highly effective lessons-learned model
from other industries. With the discovery of major software vulnerabilities and gaps in our capabilities to
effectively mitigate them, we believe this effort will help drive improvements in our overall cyber resiliency.
The Board’s first charge was to review the events surrounding the December 2021 disclosure of the Log4j
vulnerability. Log4j is a piece of open source software that developers have integrated into millions of systems.
A vulnerability in such a pervasive and ubiquitous piece of software has the ability to impact companies and
organizations (including governments) all over the world. As such, the Log4j event drives home the urgency
with which we must move to a culture of shared responsibility around managing cyber threats. The scope of
this report, and to whom we are directing the recommendations, reflect this observation.
The review of the Log4j event presented the Board with several challenges. First, unlike comparable studies of
incidents in other sectors (such as transportation), we had no crash site or damaged vehicle to inspect, no
stress tests to perform on failed equipment, and no wiring diagrams to review. Instead, we reviewed practices
used to create and adopt technology, ecosystems, and processes. We relied on subject matter experts in open
source software, its development, deployment, and maintenance. In our discussions, we observed enthusiasm
for tackling these issues, and also the community’s desire to have a more fulsome picture of where
vulnerabilities lie, which of them are exploitable, and the effectiveness of remediations.
Second, the Log4j event is not over. Log4j remains deeply embedded in systems, and even within the short
period available for our review, community stakeholders have identified new compromises, new threat actors,
and new learnings. We must remain vigilant against the risks associated with this vulnerability, and apply the
best practices described in this review.
Third, there is a real need to drive widespread development and adoption of capabilities, tooling, and
automated frameworks that support developers with the daunting task of building secure software. Just as the
software industry has enabled the democratization of software programming—the ability for anyone to generate
software with little or no formal training—we must also democratize security by baking security by default into
the platforms used to generate, build, deploy, and manage software at scale.
An open question at the start of our work was the extent to which we would receive voluntary cooperation from
industry stakeholders. We have been heartened by the outpouring of offers from industry to support the
Board’s review through insights and data. We have spoken with and received data from a substantial number
of companies and security experts. We believe industry has come to understand that the Board is not an
enforcement or regulatory body and is not focused on assigning blame. The Board instead looks forward,
making recommendations to better secure the community for the future. We give thanks to the many
companies and individual experts that offered their support for the Board’s comprehensive review.
As this was the inaugural review for the Board, we humbly sought to create the foundations for a sustainable
and impactful body that would drive systemic improvements. At our first meeting on February 25, 2022, we
agreed to a set of principles, both for this review and beyond, that embody this Board’s commitment to public
service, transparency and trust, and objective, forward-looking reviews. See Appendix A for the principles that
guided the Board’s work throughout our review.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The scale and efficiency of our global technology infrastructure are made possible through the standardization
of key building blocks. These reusable building blocks, while useful for creating software at scale, also create
dependencies and risks that are often not understood until they manifest as a security issue. For example, a
vulnerability in a software building block that is integrated into numerous other software packages means that
every organization that uses those packages is at risk. It also means that system owners may not know where
vulnerable software lives within their environments. When such a vulnerability is also easy for a threat actor to
exploit to obtain broad control over a compromised system, it can create a once-in-a-generation security event.
This is what happened with the Log4j vulnerability that came to public attention in December 2021.
Apache Log4j is an open source Java-based logging framework that collects and manages information about
system activity. Log4j is simple to use, free to download, and effective in its intended function, making it
popular among Java developers, who have embedded it into thousands of other software packages. Log4j
version 2, the primary topic of this report, was initially released in 2012. In 2013, prior to the general
availability release in 2014 and through a standard process, the Log4j team accepted a community-submitted
feature intended to ease data storage and retrieval called “JNDI [Java Naming and Directory Interface™]
Lookup plugin support.” This addition was subsequently integrated into thousands of applications in which
Log4j is used.
On November 24, 2021, a security engineer from the Alibaba Cloud Security team, within the People’s
Republic of China (PRC), reported a vulnerability in the JNDI feature to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF),
a non-profit corporation that provides support for the Log4j project.2, 3 While ASF was working to understand
the issue and devise a fix, another party disclosed the vulnerability before ASF made an upgrade available to
the general public. Such a disclosure of a significant vulnerability in any widely used piece of software
immediately triggers a race between defense and offense: a race to apply upgrades before threat actors exploit
vulnerable systems. The Log4j vulnerability was no exception.
Defenders faced a particularly challenging situation; the vulnerability impacted virtually every networked
organization and the severity of the threat required fast action. The fact that there is no comprehensive
“customer list” for Log4j, or even a list of where it is integrated as a sub-system, hindered defender progress.
Enterprises and vendors scrambled to discover where they used Log4j. The pace, pressure, and publicity
compounded the defensive challenges: security researchers quickly found additional vulnerabilities in Log4j,
contributing to confusion and “patching fatigue”; defenders struggled to distinguish vulnerability scanning by
bona fide researchers from threat actors; and responders found it difficult to find authoritative sources of
information on how to address the issues. This culminated in one of the most intensive cybersecurity
community responses in history.
Responders, spanning the public and private sectors, the open source community, and researchers globally,
collaborated and communicated in a dedicated fashion, working through weekends and the December
holidays. The Board noted high levels of cooperation, extensive use of social media for rapid sharing of
mitigation advice, innovative response actions from the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS)
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), and the creation of new shared community resources.
Generally, the Cyber Safety Review Board (CSRB, or the Board) found that organizations that responded most
effectively to the Log4j event understood their use of Log4j and had technical resources and mature processes
to manage assets, assess risk, and mobilize their organization and key partners to action. Most modern
security frameworks call out these capabilities as best practices. However, few organizations were able to
execute this kind of response, or the speed required during this incident, causing delays in both their
assessment of the risk and in their management of it. When ASF made upgrades for Log4j available, deploying
them was itself a risk decision, forcing a tradeoff between possible operational disruption and timeliness,
completeness, and compensating controls.
Organizations spent significant resources as they struggled with this problem. For example, one federal cabinet
department reported dedicating 33,000 hours to Log4j vulnerability response to protect the department’s own 
networks. These costs, often sustained over many weeks and months, delayed other mission-critical work,
including the response to other vulnerabilities.
For the long term, we will continue to see the tension between our collective need for crisis-driven risk
management and the foundational investments that would support more rapid response for future incidents.
Perhaps most significantly, the force exerted on the urgent response and the challenges in managing risk also
contributed to professional “burnout” among defenders that may, compounded with the generally intense pace
of many cybersecurity jobs, have a long-term impact on the availability of cybersecurity talent.
At the time of writing, the Board is not aware of any significant Log4j-based attacks on critical infrastructure
systems. Somewhat surprisingly, the Board also found that to date, generally speaking, exploitation of Log4j
occurred at lower levels than many experts predicted, given the severity of the vulnerability. It has been difficult
to arrive at this conclusion. While cybersecurity vendors were able to provide some anecdotal evidence of
exploitation, no authoritative source exists to understand exploitation trends across geographies, industries, or
ecosystems. Many organizations do not even collect information on specific Log4j exploitation, and reporting is
still largely voluntary.
Most importantly, however, the Log4j event is not over. The Board assesses that Log4j is an “endemic
vulnerability” and that vulnerable instances of Log4j will remain in systems for many years to come, perhaps a
decade or longer. Significant risk remains.
The Log4j event illustrates how counterintuitive cybersecurity defense can be, for both individual enterprises
and for the ecosystem as a whole. Many things went “right”: ASF had a well-established software development
lifecycle with clear roles for vetting, testing, and approving new code; security researchers followed generally
accepted steps of coordinated disclosure; ASF recognized the criticality of the problem and software
developers made upgrades available; vendors and governments rapidly produced guidance, tools, and threat
information, often in novel and beneficial ways; and the whole ecosystem rallied behind a collective sense of
urgency. Yet organizations still struggled to respond to the event, and the hard work of upgrading vulnerable
software is far from complete across many organizations.
The event also called attention to security risks unique to the thinly-resourced, volunteer-based open source
community. This community is not adequately resourced to ensure that code is developed pursuant to industry-
recognized secure coding practices and audited by experts. To reduce recurrence of the introduction of
vulnerabilities like Log4j, it is essential that public and private sector stakeholders create centralized
resourcing and security assistance structures that can support the open source community going forward.
In the course of the review, the Board also evaluated press reports suggesting that Alibaba violated PRC law
and was subsequently sanctioned by the PRC government. The Board could not identify any publicly available
official explanation, and while the PRC government provided a statement to the Board about the Log4j event
on behalf of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), it did not provide an answer to the
Board’s request for information about any sanction imposed on Alibaba. This line of inquiry raised Board
concerns around the mandatory vulnerability disclosure laws in the PRC and whether their enforcement may
afford the PRC government early access to serious, exploitable vulnerabilities before they are patched. The
Board raised similar concerns about whether these laws and reports of the PRC’s alleged decision to sanction
Alibaba for responsibly reporting a vulnerability to ASF will create a chilling effect that deters researchers from
using coordinated vulnerability disclosure best practices.
The CSRB’s mandate was to review the events surrounding this consequential vulnerability, report on lessons
learned, and make independent, strategic, and actionable recommendations to the Secretary of Homeland
Security. Using data collected from extensive interviews and requests for information, we have framed our
report in three sections: Factual Information (facts describing what happened); Findings and Conclusions (an
analysis of the facts); and Recommendations. The Recommendations are broken into four categories.
Address Continued Risks of Log4j: continued vigilance in addressing Log4j vulnerabilities for the long term.
1. Organizations should be prepared to address Log4j vulnerabilities for years to come.
2. Organizations should continue to report (and escalate) observations of Log4j exploitation.
3. CISA should expand its capability to develop, coordinate, and publish authoritative cyber risk
information.
4. Federal and state regulators should drive implementation of CISA guidance through their own
regulatory authorities.
Drive Existing Best Practices for Security Hygiene: adopt industry-accepted practices and standards for
vulnerability management and security hygiene.
5. Organizations should invest in capabilities to identify vulnerable systems.
6. Develop the capacity to maintain an accurate information technology (IT) asset and
application inventory.
7. Organizations should have a documented vulnerability response program.
8. Organizations should have a documented vulnerability disclosure and handling process.
9. Software developers and maintainers should implement secure software practices.
Build a Better Software Ecosystem: drive a transformation in the software ecosystem to move to a
proactive model of vulnerability management.
10. Open source software developers should participate in community-based security initiatives.
11. Invest in training software developers in secure software development.
12. Improve Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) tooling and adoptability.
13. Increase investments in open source software security.
14. Pilot open source software maintenance support for critical services.
Investments in the Future: pursue cultural and technological shifts necessary to solve for the nation’s
digital security for the long run.
15. Explore a baseline requirement for software transparency for federal government vendors.
16. Examine the efficacy of a Cyber Safety Reporting System (CSRS).
17. Explore the feasibility of establishing a Software Security Risk Assessment Center of
Excellence (SSRACE).
18. Study the incentive structures required to build secure software.
19. Establish a government-coordinated working group to improve identification of software with
known vulnerabilities.
REVIEW METHODOLOGY
The Board engaged with nearly 80 organizations and individuals representing software developers, end users,
security professionals, and companies. These engagements included a mixture of interviews and requests for
information. The Board is grateful for the voluntary participation of these parties that came forward and
provided timely responses. Their efforts helped the Board collect the observable timeline of events,
corroborate facts, and understand the complex dimensions of the Log4j event.
The Board sought to speak to representatives from a wide variety of viewpoints, to capture the nuances of how
different attack surfaces are designed and defended. We acknowledge that in the 90-day review period, we
were not able to reach all sectors and that some, such as medical devices, Internet-of-Things (IoT), and home
networking equipment, may have alternative experiences not captured in this report. Similarly, we recognize
that organizations outside of the United States may have experienced the Log4j event in unique ways.
Nonetheless, we believe the Board's findings and recommendations apply to a wide variety of global
organizations, given the interconnected nature of the stakeholders from whom we did hear. See Appendix B for
a list of participating organizations and individuals.
This report is divided into three major sections:
Section 1: Factual Information, provides a timeline of the Log4j vulnerability’s progression, as well as
the key facts of what happened during the event;
Section 2: Findings and Conclusions, presents the Board’s key findings with respect to the Log4j
event; and
Section 3: Recommendations, outlines action items the Board recommends for a variety of
stakeholders in the private and public sector.
Taken together, these sections tell the story of Log4j and the key stakeholders impacted and provide both
industry and government alike with a set of lessons learned that can be applied to prevent or respond more
effectively to future incidents.
A Note on Terminology
To simplify the readability of this report, references to Apache Log4j (the original Log4j package) and Apache
Log4j 2 (version 2) will be shorted to Log4j. The primary vulnerability at the center of the event and this review
(CVE-2021-44228) will be known as the Log4j vulnerability, unless further specificity is useful.
SECTION 1 – FACTUAL INFORMATION
Log4j is an open source Java-based logging framework that collects and manages information about system
activity. Since the software’s inception in 1999, it has become a popular building block for the ecosystem, with
developers incorporating Log4j into thousands of other software packages globally. A group of volunteers
maintain Log4j under the Apache Software Foundation’s (ASF) Apache Logging Services™ Project.4
1.1 GENESIS OF THE VULNERABILITY
In July 2013, a member of the open source community requested the addition of a new data storage and
retrieval mechanism (“Java Naming and Directory Interface™ [JNDI] Lookup plugin support”) to the Log4j
project.5 The requester provided a software patch that implemented the requested functionality, which the
Log4j project team reviewed and committed on July 18, 2013 for release in version 2.0-beta9.6 The
vulnerability was due to the following technical reason:
JNDI features used in configuration, log messages, and parameters do not protect against attacker controlled
LDAP [Lightweight Directory Access Protocol] and other JNDI related endpoints. An attacker who can control log
messages or log message parameters can execute arbitrary code loaded from LDAP servers when message
lookup substitution is enabled.7
This means an attacker who gains access to logging messages could inject fraudulent messages that enable
arbitrary code execution and exploitation of a vulnerable system.8
See Appendix C for additional information on Log4j development and deployment and JNDI-related risks.
1.2 DISCOVERY AND DISCLOSURE
On November 24, 2021, a security engineer from the Alibaba9 Cloud Security team in the People’s Republic of
China (PRC) reported the discovery of a vulnerability in Log4j to ASF via email.10 The engineer included
pertinent information about the vulnerability, including a description of the issue, a pointer to the vulnerable
code, a proof of concept, and screenshots.11
Once ASF became aware of the vulnerability, its intent was to develop a patch as quickly as possible, in
accordance with its policy. ASF also assessed that, due to the widespread use of Log4j, placing an embargo12
on the vulnerability would be impractical.13 ASF began reviewing code for the fix as early as November 29,
2021 via two public pull requests.14, 15 ASF opened an issue in its tracking system and committed the fix to the
Log4j source code repository on December 5, 2021,16, 17 and tagged a release candidate (Log4j-2.15.0-rc1) on
December 6, 2021. 18 ASF did not release a security advisory at that time.
On December 9, 2021, the security engineer from Alibaba informed ASF via email that the vulnerability was
being discussed on WeChat and provided a link to the relevant post.19, 20 The WeChat post, made by
BoundaryX, a PRC-based cybersecurity company, included a redacted screenshot of a proof of concept
exploit.21, 22 Upon receiving this information and becoming aware of subsequent public Twitter reports of
ongoing exploitation, ASF escalated releasing an official fix, ahead of its original plans, and made an upgrade
to version 2.15.0 available publicly on December 10, 2021.23, 24, 25
ASF also made the assigned Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) identifier (CVE-2021-44228)
publicly visible on December 10, 2021.26, 27 That same day, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA) released a statement regarding the Log4j vulnerability.28 Analysts at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) National Vulnerability Database (NVD) assessed CVE-2021-44228 as a
critical vulnerability with a Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) Base Score of 10.0, the highest score
possible. This reflected the fact that exploitation of the flaw required low attack complexity, no privilege
requirements, and no user interaction.29
The PRC government informed the Cyber Safety Review Board (CSRB, or the Board) that Alibaba notified the
Ministry of Industry and Information (MIIT) of the vulnerability on December 13, 2021.30
Figure 1 illustrates key events from the discovery and disclosure of CVE-2021-4428 between November 24,
2021 to December 13, 2021.

Figure 1 – Log4j Vulnerability Disclosure Timeline
Following the public disclosure of CVE-2021-44228, and widespread industry coverage, researchers
discovered and reported additional vulnerabilities in Log4j to ASF. Following its standard processes, ASF
triaged these reports, assigned CVE identifiers, and provided software upgrades to the community:
• CVE-2021-4504631 – a remote code execution vulnerability (December 14, 2021) fixed in version
2.16.0;32
• CVE-2021-410433 – a remote code execution vulnerability affecting Log4j 1.2 (December 14, 2021)
that could be addressed by upgrading to Log4j 2;
• CVE-2021-4510534 – a denial-of-service (DoS) vulnerability (December 18, 2021) fixed in version
2.17.0;35 and
• CVE-2021-4483236 – a vulnerability that allows an attacker to modify the logging configuration file to
execute remote code (December 28, 2021) fixed in version 2.17.1.37
1.3 EXPLOITATION
A technology services company observed the earliest known exploitation of the Log4j vulnerability over two
days beginning on December 1, 2021. This company assessed the activity was consistent with the testing of
the Alibaba security engineer's initial proof-of-concept payload.38, 39 In the course of our review and after
examining classified and unclassified government information and industry data, the Board did not discover
any additional evidence confirming further use of Log4j exploit code in the wild, including use by threat actors
from the PRC, Iran, North Korea, and Russia, prior to the December 9, 2021 disclosure of the vulnerability.40
Numerous sources observed attempts to exploit Log4j after disclosure of the vulnerability on December 9,
2021. Security researchers and security teams also generated a large volume of vulnerability scanning activity
that was difficult to distinguish from malicious activity.41 Five days following the flaw’s disclosure, Cloudflare
observed 400 exploitation attempts per second,42 totaling millions of scanning attempts to identify vulnerable
systems.43 This volume reflects SANS Institute’s (SANS) observations that exploiting the flaw “is actually
unbelievably simple—which makes it very, very scary at the same time.”44
Some additional industry observations:
• Akamai assessed that approximately 57% of observed exploitation activity within the first week of
public disclosure originated from known malicious actors;45
• a technology services company observed a spike in scanning for the vulnerability less than two hours
after publication of the vulnerability;46
• vendors like one cybersecurity technology services company observed the use of botnets to automate
the reconnaissance process to quickly identify vulnerable targets;47
• a cybersecurity technology services company investigated multiple ransomware incidents that
leveraged the Log4j vulnerability from January 2022 through March 2022;48
• Check Point researchers observed nation-state threat actors exploiting the Log4j vulnerability;49
• Cisco Talos observed the Internet-of-Things botnet known as Mirai exploiting Log4j;50
• a cybersecurity technology services company attributed a high volume of initial exploitation attempts
to known cybersecurity vendors and researchers;51
• Mandiant reported significant intrusion activity from several threat actors;52
• a technology services company witnessed threat actors using cryptocurrency miners and multiple
ransomware payloads;
• Microsoft reported attackers attempting to leverage a previously unknown vulnerability in SolarWinds
Serv-U to propagate Log4j attacks; 54 and
• Sophos observed a wave of attacks against vulnerable VMware Horizon servers beginning January 19,
2022.55
Log4j exploitation occurred rapidly after publication of the vulnerability,56 so much so that exploitation in
December alone earned the Log4j vulnerability a place on the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) CISA
list of Top Routinely Exploited Vulnerabilities in 2021.57 Security researchers and vendors assess that
exploitation will continue.58, 59, 60, 61, 62
1.4 RESPONSE
In response to the Log4j vulnerability, thousands of security professionals across the globe mobilized
simultaneously to identify and mitigate hundreds of millions of potentially affected devices. One interview with
the Board revealed that “no one in the industry was sleeping that weekend [following the vulnerability’s
announcement]—they were trying to patch millions of servers.”63 In a December 13, 2021 teleconference with
industry leaders, Director Jen Easterly noted, “[the vulnerability] is one of the most serious I’ve seen in my
entire career, if not the most serious.”64 Industry experts and reporters echoed her sentiments.
Communications and Public Guidance
Immediately following the disclosure of the Log4j vulnerability, software developers and cybersecurity
professionals globally used formal and informal communication channels to share mitigation tactics and
provide guidance to the public.
Many interviewed stakeholders indicated one of their earliest, if not their first, notifications of the vulnerability
came from social media platforms, especially Twitter,65, 66, 67 where the broader security community shared
vulnerability information and emerging indicators of compromise (IOC). Individual accounts also shared
exploitation variants, obfuscation and defense evasion techniques, and other trends to enable responders to
adjust defensive measures and deter potential attacks. Multiple interviewees told the Board that Twitter was a
valuable resource for global events of this type.
Stin
Figure 2 – SANS Internet Storm Center (ISC) detailing the scale of Log4j exploit attempts on December 10, 2021
U.S. Government Coordination
All U.S. government agencies had a role in responding to Log4j: protecting their own networks; tracking
potential malicious activity; or prompting key constituencies to act. However, the Board’s review largely
focused on CISA and its role in protecting federal infrastructure, and the Office of the Federal Chief Information
Security Officer.
On December 10, 2021, one day after the public disclosure of the vulnerability, CISA issued a statement
highlighting the ASF advisory and encouraged users and administrators to upgrade their systems or apply
mitigations immediately.70 On December 17, CISA released Emergency Directive (ED) 22-02, which detailed
mitigation measures for vulnerable products and patch prioritization recommendations, and required civilian
Executive Branch agencies to address Log4j vulnerabilities within two weeks.71 In the days following the
disclosure, CISA focused on facilitating collaboration with trusted partners, such as its efforts to understand
mitigations for Industrial Control Systems (ICS) vendors with Carnegie Mellon’s Vulnerability Information and
Coordination Environment (VINCE) software vulnerability team.72
CISA also tapped into the newly established Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC),73 which facilitated the
collection, organization, and consolidation of data to determine the impact of the vulnerability and support the
development of comprehensive remediation. In interviews with the Board, a number of stakeholders reported
that the JCDC was an important catalyst for information sharing to address the threat.74, 75, 76 CISA received 17
threat analyses from JCDC members that it would not have otherwise seen until days later, when those
members eventually published their products.77 Notably, some material that JCDC members provided to CISA
was not publicly released, but CISA was still able to access and use this information to better inform its
products, guidance, and analysis.78
To coordinate and communicate with external partners in real time during the Log4j event, CISA established
Slack channels. One JCDC member reported to the Board that these Slack channels were beneficial for bi-
directional information sharing between industry and government stakeholders, especially early in the
vulnerability response.79 CISA set up several channels that varied in purpose and participants; one channel
was for sharing threat information (e.g., tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) and IOCs) and analysis
among JCDC’s Alliance partners and other key technology companies. CISA also created a channel for related
collaboration across JCDC’s U.S. government partners.80
Before issuing ED 22-02, CISA launched two community resources on December 13, 2021:
• a centralized knowledge management website of high-level, executive-level, and technical products,
including pre-vetted information from trusted partners;81, 82 and
• a GitHub repository83 with an extensive list of vulnerable products and components to help responders
understand where the Log4j software resided within their environments, along with associated
remediation recommendations.84
CISA noted that it shared guidance from third parties that it vetted and identified as credible due to their
reputation and prior work. Due to the urgency of the situation, CISA shared other unvalidated third-party
resources and encouraged readers to independently verify the information.85 CISA worked directly with
researchers and vendors to identify and catalog vulnerable products within a well-received public GitHub
repository.86, 87, 88
CISA’s response provided defenders with specific and comprehensive guidance for vulnerability management,
including patch prioritization. Stakeholders provided positive feedback to the Board about the utility of CISA’s
guidance, saying it provided a trusted source for direction and specific resources.89 However, some
stakeholders noted that unvalidated social media sources occasionally published information before credible
government and industry sources issued guidance.
Other U.S. government agencies also created alerts and provided guidance for Log4j mitigation. On December
15, 2021, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) published a message encouraging victims to report any
malicious activity or victim compromise.90 CISA, the FBI, the National Security Agency (NSA), and international
cybersecurity counterparts from Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom (U.K.) published a
joint advisory with technical details, mitigations, and resources for organizations using Log4j products.91 The
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) amplified CISA’s guidance through a blog post, declaring that “[t]he FTC
intends to use its full legal authority to pursue companies that fail to take reasonable steps to protect
consumer data from exposure as a result of Log4j, or similar known vulnerabilities in the future.”92 The
Department of Defense (DoD) also published a memorandum on January 24, 2022 that cited two fundamental
concerns surrounding the use of open source software: supply chain risk management for externally
maintained code in critical DoD systems as potential paths for introduction of malicious code; and the
disclosure of key innovations via imprudent sharing of code developed for DoD systems for adversary benefit.93
See Appendix D for communications from U.S. and foreign governments, the private sector, and the media.
Case Studies: Other Government Responses to Log4j
The Board engaged representatives from government cybersecurity agencies in Israel and the United
Kingdom to share notable features of their responses to the Log4j vulnerability
Israel United Kingdom
The Israel National Cyber Directorate (INCD) After the critical Microsoft Exchange vulnerabilities in
leveraged internal and perimeter vulnerability 2021, the U.K.’s National Cyber Security Centre
scanners alongside a comprehensive configuration (NCSC-UK) integrated new processes to improve
management database (CMDB) and internet service future vulnerability management guidance, which it
provider (ISP) data to filter, aggregate, correlate, and leveraged throughout the Log4j event.
enrich data for providing information about the
The NCSC-UK used a newly implemented
vulnerability.
vulnerability scoring and categorization framework
While INCD observed approximately 3 million (developed to complement its existing incident
attempts to exploit the Log4j vulnerability, INCD categorization matrix) to determine the need for
representatives attributed their ability to quickly response and coordination across government and
remediate successful exploitation incidents to law enforcement resources. In addition to providing
having the right people in the right place with the responders with a kit that contained mitigation and
right resources.94 In particular, INCD noted that it remediation guidance and critical vulnerability
closed the vulnerability relatively quickly because it advice for boards, the NCSC-UK also hosted an “ask
aligned dedicated resources to its critical me anything” session to facilitate real-time response
infrastructure organizations. endeavors.95
Organizational Responses
Generally, organizations that responded most effectively to the Log4j event understood their systems’ use of
Log4j and had technical resources and mature processes to manage assets,96 absorb new information and
assess the potential risk, and mobilize the entire organization and key partners to action.97 In many cases,
however, a lack of awareness and understanding of Log4j, insufficient resources, or lack of vendor upgrades
hampered organizational response to the vulnerability.98
Many security engineers reported addressing the complexity or impossibility of upgrading Log4j immediately by
using a wide variety of mitigation actions,99, 100 especially when patches for third-party products were
unavailable. These actions included:
• egress filtering of network traffic from systems utilizing vulnerable Log4j code;
• deleting the JndiLookup.class file containing the vulnerable code;
• patching or disabling sections of vulnerable code, including modifying running systems by applying hot
patches;
• blocking possible attack traffic by configuring Web Application Firewalls (WAF) to limit exploit queries;
and
• physically removing affected assets from the network until they could be upgraded.
SECTION 2 – FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
The Board’s findings and conclusions are the result of its independent review. These findings and conclusions
are based on information gleaned from literature searches, interviews, requests for information, and analysis
of public, private, and government-source information. The Board relied upon the voluntary participation of
numerous organizations affected by the Log4j vulnerability.
The findings and conclusions in this section are not intended to assign blame or fault to any individual or
collective parties, but rather to highlight opportunities where the community can understand lessons and apply
safety improvements for the future.
2.1 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
The Log4j event illustrates how counterintuitive cybersecurity defense can be, for both individual enterprises
and for the ecosystem as a whole. Many things went “right”: ASF had a well-established software development
lifecycle with clear roles for vetting, testing, and approval of new code; security researchers followed generally
accepted steps of coordinated disclosure; ASF quickly recognized the criticality of the problem and made
upgrades available; vendors and governments rapidly produced guidance, tools, and threat information; and
the whole ecosystem rallied behind a collective sense of urgency.101, 102 However, organizations still struggled
to respond to the event, and in fact, the Board found that many organizations have still not fully patched
vulnerable instances of Log4j.
The Board found that software developers, maintainers, vulnerability response teams, and the U.S. government
commonly made risk trade-offs about software use and integration. For example, organizations made the
decision to use Log4j, rather than develop a logging framework from scratch. Similarly, organizations make
decisions to use software from an established organization (e.g., ASF) based on its mature and vetted
processes. The Log4j event highlighted fundamental adoption gaps in vulnerability response practices and
overall cybersecurity hygiene. These gaps highlighted challenges in raising awareness within organizations;
coordinating trusted and authoritative sources of information; mitigating at scale; measuring the enormity of
the risk; and synchronizing the understanding of threats and corresponding defensive action.103
The fundamentals of Enterprise Risk Management, described in this section, are foundational tools that enable
organizations to locate affected software assets, rapidly identify risks to business operations, upgrade
vulnerable software, and monitor for malicious activity.104
101 Federal Chief Information Security Officer (CISO). Subcommittee Meeting.
102 Recent coordination efforts between researchers, vendors, and the federal government demonstrate enhanced agility and
alignment across industry verticals. This observation poses an opportunity for experts to leverage their skill set (e.g., software
development, threat intelligence, and similar skills) to identify risks and improve communal trust across sectors via responsible
disclosure. As observed through both the Log4j and SolarWinds events, this also enables authoritative sources to promote
awareness and facilitate vulnerability management efforts to address emergent risks. Source: Mandia, Kevin, FireEye, “FireEye
Shares Details of Recent Cyber Attack, Actions to Protect Community,” December 8, 2020,
https://www.fireeye.com/blog/products-and-services/2020/12/fireeye-shares-details-of-recent-cyber-attack-actions-to-protect-
community.html; Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), “Emergency Directive 21-01 – Mitigate SolarWinds Orion
Code Compromise, https://www.cisa.gov/emergency-directive-21-01
2.2 CONTRIBUTING FACTORS OF THE VULNERABILITY
At a technical level, the introduction of the JNDI lookup plugin support “which could be exploited by an attacker
due to the way Log4j interacts with JNDI without properly validating all requests”105 as outlined in Section 1.1
–Discovery and Disclosure led to the Log4j vulnerability. However, a number of factors amplified the scale,
complexity, and risk level of the vulnerability:
• Log4j is routinely embedded in other software components, often unknown at later levels of
integration or system operation, making it a difficult vulnerability to identify using common scanning
approaches;
• the Log4j framework is incorporated into thousands of software components globally,106 and many of
the nation’s critical infrastructure and government systems rely on it;
• consistent with industry convention, the Log4j and ASF teams do not manage or know who uses the
software they produce, or how it is eventually used;
• the Log4j vulnerability is easy for attackers to exploit and affords a high degree of system control to an
attacker once exploited.107, 108
The Board also found specific challenges associated with maintaining open source projects like Log4j, which
generally rely on volunteer teams and do not necessarily have dedicated security resources throughout the
Software Development Lifecycle.109 Open source projects generally do not have dedicated coordinated
vulnerability disclosure and response teams that investigate root causes of reported vulnerabilities and work to
bring them to resolution. Open source projects like Log4j often also develop code “in the open,” where security
changes are publicly visible as they are being developed. This suggests that advisories and community
response may need to be activated concurrently with any fixes to narrow the window for malicious exploitation
prior to the official patch being available for defenders.110 See Appendix E for the Board’s observations of the
open source software ecosystem during the Log4j event.
These factors created a perilous combination: an enormous attack surface vulnerable to exploitation;
vulnerability response teams that often could not identify where the vulnerable code could be found in their
systems; and a vulnerability that is easily exploited to grant significant unauthorized access to systems,
including sensitive systems used to support critical infrastructure and federal government operations.
The Board also examined whether the Log4j vulnerability could have been prevented or caught earlier,
particularly whether the introduction of the JNDI lookup plugin support in 2013 would have resulted in
unintended exploitability of the added functionality. The Board concluded that a focused review, performed by
someone with sufficient experience with the security implications of adding the JNDI support, could have
identified the unintended functionality (i.e., the vulnerability). Unfortunately, the resources to perform such a
review were not available to the volunteer developers who led this open-source project in 2013.111, 112
105 Kerner, Sean Michael, TechTarget, “Log4j explained: Everything you need to know,” January 27, 2022,
https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/feature/Log4j-explained-Everything-you-need-to-know
106 The Log4j and SolarWinds events both revealed the far-reaching attack surface and potential damage that can result from a
problem found within a widely distributed technology. Source: Federal Agency. Response to Board request for information.
107 Chief executive; Cybersecurity technology services company. Subcommittee Meeting.
108 Similar to consequences of the Log4j 2 vulnerability, the SolarWinds supply chain compromise enabled threat actors to gain
initial access to several target environments, move throughout their systems, and deploy multi-staged attacks. Source: Herr, Trey
et al., The Atlantic Council, “Broken Trust: Lessons from Sunburst,” March 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/BROKEN-TRUST.pdf
The ASF developers conveyed to the Board that automated security testing would not have caught this specific
vulnerability, though they noted that an extensive code audit might have identified the issue.113 The Log4j
developers might not have introduced the vulnerability in 2013 if they had had access at the time to training in
secure coding practices consistent with established secure development lifecycle tools and techniques.114 A
technology services company seconded that position and suggested that security-oriented design reviews,
threat models, and security audits may have prevented events such as Log4j.115
Ultimately, even if the Log4j developers or others had identified the flaw in published versions of Log4j prior to
November 2021, the community would still have had to respond as outlined in this report. The Board also
found that the only way to reduce the likelihood of risk to the ecosystem caused by vulnerabilities in Log4j, and
other widely used open source software, is to ensure that code is developed pursuant to industry-recognized
secure coding practices and an attendant audit by security experts. The open source community, which is
volunteer-based, would need sustained financial support and expertise to make this possible.
2.3 ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT
After disclosure of the Log4j vulnerability, organizations had to rapidly assess and manage their potential risk,
at both a technical and business level.116 Generally, the Board found that organizations that responded most
effectively to the Log4j event already had technical resources and mature processes in place to identify
vulnerable assets, absorb new information, assess potential risk, and mobilize their entire organization and
key partners to action. See Appendix F for a summary of the Board’s insights on effective practices that
organizations leveraged when managing the Log4j event.
Most modern security frameworks call out these activities, such as:
• application of technologies and processes that enable the management of and visibility into hardware,
software, and systems;
• activation of existing incident crisis, or vulnerability management plans, which clearly define
responsibilities and for which staff has been trained;
• ongoing risk management processes that identify business/mission-critical systems, data application,
outsourced risk management partners, and establish traceable mitigation strategies; and
• plans for internal and external communication methods to inform leadership, internal teams, and
customers.
More security-mature organizations also mobilized existing and ad hoc teams to:
• bring together groups such as security operations, information technology (IT) operations, penetration
testing, vulnerability management, threat intelligence, and product security to identify enterprise weak
spots, compare them to external attacker trends, and mobilize defenses; and
• create coordination teams to oversee Log4j-related activities across the organization and to
participate in active outreach to third-party service providers, the general public, and government
entities.117, 118
Many organizations made use of mitigations described in Section 1.4 – Response, subsection Organizational
Responses (such as turning off affected systems or using WAFs). While these were helpful in the short term,
they did not correct the underlying issues, or were superseded by later guidance that required additional
resources. Some mitigations were more drastic (including removing systems from production) and had direct
impact on mission. However, as ASF released various upgrades for Log4j, organizations focused on upgrading
their systems, due to the nature of the vulnerability.119
Many organizations depended on the responsiveness of their vendors to understand and remediate the
vulnerability.120 Some organizations still harbor concerns, despite vendors reporting having implemented
updates, due to the interdependencies between different applications and components.121
Industry experts have called for increased automation to help organizations identify vulnerable software and
execute Enterprise Risk Management at scale, but they also recognize that cataloging software components at
this depth can be prohibitively labor intensive. Solutions to enable these necessary capabilities do not exist.
The Role of Software Bills of Materials
Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) provide a list of components included in software, and theoretically
should enable organizations to identify vulnerable software components in their environments.122 The Board
spoke with representative groups for organizations currently using SBOMs in their environments, and none
reported having leveraged them to identify vulnerable deployments of Log4j.
As designed today, SBOMs are limited, for example by variances in field descriptions and a lack of version
information about catalogued components, and lack of automation on the consumption end due to these
variances. Addressing SBOM standardization gaps would support a faster software supply chain vulnerability
response.
2.4 ECOSYSTEM RISK MANAGEMENT
During the Log4j event, risk management activities across the ecosystem impacted individual organizations’
response efforts. For example, all parties benefited when a trusted entity, CISA, raised an alarm and provided
mitigations, such as its joint Log4j cybersecurity advisory123 and ED 22-02.124 On the other hand, the
ecosystem also contributed to “noise” and uncertainty in the early days of the vulnerability disclosure, leading
to an overwhelming amount of information.
Based on the severity of the Log4j vulnerability, all enterprises needed to rapidly assess the potential risk to
their business operations and develop and execute a plan of action. The U.S. government also needed to
understand and manage the overall risk to the total U.S. cyber ecosystem. This required integration of
information across the full range of threats, vulnerabilities, and potential consequences. It also required the
ability to define the risk and spur action across the United States, especially within critical infrastructure and
government, including national security functions.
Even before the Log4j vulnerability disclosures, CISA had taken important steps to drive network defender
attention toward broader risk management of known security vulnerabilities. On November 3, 2021, CISA
issued Binding Operational Directive (BOD) 22-01 – Reducing the Significant Risk of Known Exploited
Vulnerabilities (KEVs).125 Based on persistent cyber campaigns threatening the public and private sectors, this
publication established a catalog of KEVs representing significant risk to the federal enterprise.126 The directive
required federal agencies to take three actions:
• review and update agency internal vulnerability management procedures;
• remediate each vulnerability; and
• report on the status of vulnerabilities listed in the catalog.
CISA updated the catalog on December 10, 2021 to include Log4j (CVE-2021-44228). The catalog established
a clear U.S. government-wide policy and an expectation of action and reporting. It also brought specific
operational priority to ongoing federal activities to complement technology improvement and compliance
programs.
Other U.S. federal agencies chose to amplify or highlight CISA's resources and guidance. For example, the FTC
issued a blog post citing CISA’s guidance and resources for managing the risk around Log4j. This blog post
outlined the FTC’s intent to use its full legal authority to pursue companies that failed to take reasonable steps
to protect consumer data due to exposure resulting from Log4j. Anecdotal reports suggest this blog drove
significant mitigation activity among organizations concerned with the FTC’s potential enforcement actions.127
While this communication was not coordinated directly with CISA, it highlights how regulatory agencies and
CISA can benefit from each others’ expertise and authorities. CISA is the authoritative federal voice on how to
reduce risk from a severe vulnerability like Log4j. Regulators (whether federal or state) do not generally have
CISA’s level of cybersecurity expertise, but can use their significant enforcement authorities to drive
compliance with CISA’s guidance among their regulated communities. This results in improved uptake of
CISA’s recommendations, and thus improved overall national cybersecurity.
Ecosystem Risks Inherent in the PRC’s Regulatory Regime and Sanctions Against Alibaba
The global community benefited from the engineer at Alibaba following recognized practices for coordinated
vulnerability disclosure.
The PRC government informed the Board that Alibaba reported the vulnerability to the PRC’s Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology on December 13, 2021.128, 129 This report to MIIT appears to be 19 days
after the Alibaba security engineer private disclosure of the vulnerability to ASF, and 17 days after a deadline
stipulated in Article 7.2 of MIIT’s Regulations on the Management of Security Vulnerabilities of Network
Products, which would have obligated Alibaba to report vulnerabilities in its own products (i.e., its own products
that incorporate Log4j).130 Starting December 22, 2021, several Western and Chinese-language media
sources reported that MIIT suspended Alibaba from a cybersecurity threat information sharing platform
partnership for failing to report the Log4j vulnerability to MIIT in a timely manner.131, 132, 133, 134 Because the
PRC government has not publicly provided a detailed explanation of any sanctions, and MIIT’s response to the
Board’s official request for information did not address this specific matter, the Board was unable to verify the
rationale for the sanctions.
Independent of a possible sanction against Alibaba, the Board noted troubling elements of MIIT’s regulations
governing disclosure of security vulnerabilities. The requirement for network product providers to report
vulnerabilities in their products to MIIT within two days of discovery could give the PRC government early
knowledge of vulnerabilities before vendor fixes are made available to the community. The Board is concerned
this will afford the PRC government a window in which to exploit vulnerabilities before network defenders can
patch them. This is a disturbing prospect given the PRC government’s known track record of intellectual
property theft,135 intelligence collection,136 surveillance of human rights activists and dissidents,137 and
military cyber operations.138
128 PRC government. Board Meeting. July 7, 2022. In response to a written Board request about the Log4j event and the PRC
government’s involvement in it, an attaché from the PRC embassy in Washington, D.C. offered the following verbal statement on
behalf of the PRC Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, but would not answer follow up questions:
Cybersecurity is a common challenge faced by all countries and maintaining cybersecurity requires the joint
participation of the public and private sectors of all countries. On December 13, 2021 Alibaba called and
reported to the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the PRC (MIIT) that it had discovered a security
vulnerability in the Apache Log4j 2 component and informed the Apache Software Foundation of the United
States. Based on the vulnerability, patches released by Apache, MIIT issued network and cybersecurity risk alerts
to the society. Alibaba took its own technical capability to take the lead in discovering the vulnerability and
reporting it to the relevant software providers is worthy of recognition. The Chinese government encourages and
supports capable enterprises to promptly notify network providers to patch vulnerabilities and enhance
productive security in accordance with the open source community vulnerability information disclosure rules
after discovering vulnerabilities. We also encourage enterprises to share cyber threat information and improve
the level of provision and response to cyber threats of all parties so as to build a more secure and [inaudible]
open cyberspace. Relevant information can be found on the website, including that of the MIIT.
Furthermore, Article 9.6 of the MIIT regulations includes a provision prohibiting organizations or individuals
from publicly disclosing vulnerabilities during “major national events” without the consent of the Ministry of
Public Security (MPS). This regulation does not appear to prevent disclosure of a vulnerability to affected
parties responsible for creating a fix, but depending on the domicile of that party, it may create circumstances
where the PRC government can prohibit a public disclosure under vague, lightly-defined conditions. This could
potentially prolong the period in which the PRC government can act on the vulnerability for its own purposes
before network defenders can be made aware of a risk.
In the Board’s judgment, Alibaba’s researcher acted responsibly by following a sound coordinated disclosure
process with ASF, and the Board is concerned about alleged punitive government sanctions creating a chilling
effect on future coordinated disclosure.
Information Overload
Numerous interviewees highlighted the overall unity of effort and communications across the broader cyber
community, noting a sense of common struggle against an unprecedented and dangerous new vulnerability.
They also observed that the flood of well-intentioned information soon became overwhelming, rather than
empowering, for impacted organizations. This was especially true during the initial response, due to the
amount of information coming from security researchers on Twitter,139, 140 notifications from ASF, vendor
security alerts, press coverage, and notifications from government agencies, such as CISA. In a sea of alerts
about potential mitigations and defensive measures, network defenders sought authoritative guidance that
they could confidently take to their teams and execute against.141 Appendix D provides more insight into the
amount of information that inundated responders.
The impact of this information overload is apparent in the sequence of multiple releases of Log4j upgrades as
researchers discovered additional security flaws (see Section 1.2 – Discovery and Disclosure). Due to
continuous releases of upgrades, organizations had to consume new information in real time in order to
understand to which version they should upgrade relative to their overall risk posture. Some turned to CVSS
scores for insights into their risk exposure. However, CVSS scores do not provide insight into the impact of the
vulnerability in the context of an organization’s business assets, exposure, or operations, or the specific intent
of attackers exploiting the vulnerability. As impacted organizations attempted to prioritize these risks and
determine remediations, they were forced to sort through bulletins, advisories, and guidance from vendors,
media, partners, and government sources.
Organizations also faced information overload from their own security monitoring programs. After disclosure of
the vulnerability, organizations reported observing widespread vulnerability scanning, and many were unable to
distinguish attackers from bona fide researchers. This meant organizations found it challenging to understand
whether or not malicious threat actors were attacking their systems. Some organizations offered resources to
help focus responders, for example GreyNoise has a free community portal to help identify known malicious
and known benign (including research) scans.142
2.5 IMPACT ON BUSINESS OPERATIONS
Given the scale of use of Log4j, the ease of exploiting the vulnerable feature, and widespread reporting on the
vulnerability, the Board expected to find during its review that the vulnerability had a significant impact on the
safety of the digital ecosystem. However, at the time the Board concluded its review, despite industry
observations of widespread exploitation attempts (see Section 1.3 – Exploitation), the Board did not learn of
any significant attacks impacting organizations, including attacks on critical infrastructure.143
Several factors provide context for this outcome. First, while cybersecurity vendors could provide anecdotal
evidence of exploitation, the Board found it challenging to identify an authoritative source from which to
understand exploitation trends across geographies, industries, or ecosystems. Many organizations did not
collect or report information on specific Log4j exploitation. The use of scanning techniques that limited the
ability to differentiate between benign and malicious activity during the Log4j event further complicated this
picture. Second, information about which organizations were impacted, and specific threat activity (for example
advanced persistent threats (APTs)), is generally limited to information that victims voluntarily report. No
central repository of information about Log4j-related breaches exists, and mandatory reporting requirements
that would make one possible are limited or not yet in legal effect.
However, many organizations did report to the Board that they saw a negative impact to their business
operations due to the complex nature of Log4j response efforts, which required them to reallocate significant
resources in a short period of time. For example, one federal cabinet department reported dedicating 33,000
hours to Log4j vulnerability response.144 These responses, often sustained over many weeks and months,
resulted in high costs and delayed other mission-critical work, including responding to other vulnerabilities.
In the long term, the collective need for crisis-driven risk management distracts resources and management
attention from foundational investments that would support rapid response in future incidents. In the case of
the Log4j event, for example, the forced speed of response and challenges of managing risk induced
professional “burnout” among defenders that could have a long-term impact on cybersecurity talent
attrition.145 Cybersecurity professionals cannot collectively sustain a model where most of their resources are
spent reacting to emerging problems like a steady stream of vulnerabilities.
At this time, Log4j has become an “endemic vulnerability” that will be exploited for years to come.146, 147 The
impact to organizations over the long term will be difficult to assess without better tools for discerning real
exploitation and centralized reporting of successful compromises.148
SECTION 3 – RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations outlined in this section respond to the Board’s mandate to identify improvements for
cybersecurity and make independent, strategic, and actionable recommendations to the Secretary of
Homeland Security, while recognizing that the Log4j event is ongoing and the vulnerability continues to
potentially expose organizations. The Board notes that the community should implement improvements to
forestall the next Log4j-type event while also undertaking actions to intervene and remediate the present risks.
Therefore, our recommendations blend the need for continued vigilance with a drive toward medium-term
adoption of existing security hygiene best practices and investments to improve cybersecurity processes,
frameworks, and policies. Additionally, new investment and novel approaches are necessary to bring about
transformations that scale to protect the entire the ecosystem at an optimal level of capability and maturity.
The Log4j event occurred amid a wider conversation to improve the nation’s cybersecurity posture, where
private and public sector partnerships are developing promising new policy and industry-led actions such as
the shift to Zero Trust architectures, new strategies for software assurance, and new requirements for
reporting incidents. Many of these efforts were still nascent at the time of this report’s production, but merit
special acknowledgement in their respective contexts as they relate to the Log4j event. Where applicable, we
have recognized where those efforts are related to the Board’s recommendations.
The Board’s recommendations are organized under four themes:
1. Address Continued Risks of Log4j: promote continued vigilance in addressing Log4j vulnerabilities for
the long term;
2. Drive Existing Best Practices for Security Hygiene: adopt industry-accepted practices and standards for
vulnerability management and security hygiene;
3. Build a Better Software Ecosystem: drive a transformation in the software ecosystem to move to a
proactive model of vulnerability management; and
4. Investments in the Future: research possible cultural and technology shifts necessary to solve for the
nation’s digital security.
ADDRESS CONTINUED RISKS OF LOG4J
The Board predicts that, given the ubiquity of Log4j, vulnerable versions will remain in systems for the next
decade, and we will see exploitation evolve to effectively take advantage of the weaknesses.
1. Organizations should be prepared to address Log4j vulnerabilities for years to come.
All organizations should have capabilities to discover and upgrade vulnerable software and the ability to
sustain execution of these vulnerability management capabilities for the long term.
• All organizations should continue to proactively monitor for and upgrade vulnerable versions of Log4j.
• All organizations should prioritize applying software upgrades (using mitigations sparingly) as
described in Section 2.4 – Ecosystem Risk Management, to avoid errant conditions that would create
exposure over the long term (for example, configuration mistakes that expose vulnerable attack
surfaces).
• All organizations should use robust business processes that prevent the reintroduction of vulnerable
versions of Log4j (regressions).
• All organizations should take a risk-based approach to remediating Log4j so they can address other
high-severity vulnerabilities.
2. Organizations should continue to report (and escalate) observations of Log4j exploitation.
Maintaining collective defense against the ongoing Log4j exploitation requires all stakeholders to share
insights about activity they are observing.
• Federal agency Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs) should report instances of Log4j
exploitation to CISA even if they do not meet the threshold for a significant event.
• All organizations are encouraged to report significant incidents resulting from Log4j exploitation to the
FBI or CISA.
• CISA should expedite, to the greatest extent possible, its implementation of the landmark cyber
incident reporting requirements Congress enacted in March 2022 through the Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022 (CIRCIA).149 The new mandate requires CISA to
conduct initial rulemaking activities within 24 months, but CISA should conduct its implementation as
quickly as possible within that timeframe.
• The Cyber Incident Reporting Council150 should prioritize recommendations that will ensure that
significant exploitations of vulnerabilities like Log4j are promptly reported to CISA and other
appropriate agencies.
The Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022 contains elements designed to increase
observation of vulnerability exploitation. For example, CIRCIA:
• establishes a requirement for critical infrastructure entities to report cyber incidents within 72
hours of discovery;
• protects proprietary information from misuse;
• shields reporting entities from liability as a result of the reporting; and
• creates the Cyber Incident Reporting Council, chaired by the Department of Homeland Security, to
review and recommend actions to harmonize cyber incident reporting requirements across federal
regulatory, law enforcement, and sector risk management agencies.
3. CISA should expand its capability to develop, coordinate, and publish authoritative cyber risk information.
Many organizations faced challenges in identifying authoritative sources of information to effectively respond
to the Log4j vulnerability. CISA, as the operational lead for federal cybersecurity and national coordinator for
critical infrastructure security and resilience, is the natural federal lead to collect and disseminate authoritative
information before, during, and after a cyber event.
• CISA should continue to evaluate Log4j exploitation risk and enhance the risk management
capabilities of the broader community through interagency coordination. To achieve this objective:
the Intelligence Community should provide to CISA ongoing assessments of the capability
o
and intent of threat actors to exploit the Log4j vulnerability;
federal CISOs and the JCDC should provide to CISA those vulnerabilities that, if exploited,
o
would yield significant impact to critical infrastructure, national security, or the economy;
and
CISA should solicit, analyze, and integrate non-federal and federal data, including threat,
o
consequence, and vulnerability data, to yield actionable information to enhance Log4j
risk management.
• CISA should enhance communication by designating resources to widely distribute actionable
information to stakeholders and continue to invest in trusted relationships to prepare for the next
incident. CISA should continue to:
validate information sources and coordinate authoritative messaging during ongoing
o
significant cybersecurity events;
leverage existing trust communities such as Information Sharing and Analysis
o
Organizations (ISAOs) and Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs), and public-
private sector partnerships; and
methodically expand industry partner relationships with organizations that can provide
o
telemetry data, exploitation trends, and insight into ongoing threat actor activity to obtain
a more informed understanding surrounding cybersecurity incidents, promote optimized
information sharing mechanisms, and enable reliable and constructive response efforts
across varying event types.
• CISA should request that members of the JCDC periodically measure Log4j exploitation and determine
whether and where (for example, by industry, sector, or platform) alerts and advisories could help
reinforce the need for patching and mitigation.
• CISA, in coordination with the FBI and the Intelligence Community, should develop a joint cyber threat
model for projecting advanced adversaries’ long-term exploitation capabilities based on their historical
TTPs.
4. Federal and state regulators should drive implementation of CISA guidance through their own regulatory
authorities.
CISA operates on a voluntary cooperation model with industry, but regulators have the legal authorities to drive
better cybersecurity by compelling or encouraging their regulated communities to comply with CISA’s guidance.
The FTC showed leadership in this respect by pointing its stakeholders to CISA’s Log4j guidance, following
CISA’s engagement with the FTC to educate the agency about the vulnerability and effective mitigations.
• Federal and state regulators across industry sectors should identify opportunities to direct or
encourage their regulated communities to implement CISA guidance, advisories, and best practices.
DHS, and specifically CISA, should similarly encourage federal and state regulators to become familiar
with CISA’s products and offer those regulators support in amplifying them.
DRIVE EXISTING BEST PRACTICES FOR SECURITY HYGIENE
Organizations should adopt current industry-accepted practices and standards for vulnerability management
and security hygiene.
5. Organizations should invest in capabilities to identify vulnerable systems.
Organizations should invest in capabilities that allow them to identify vulnerable systems and applications in
their environments in a timely manner.
• All organizations, including U.S. government agencies, should maintain an accurate asset and
application inventory (as discussed in Recommendation 6), using automation and tooling as
necessary, as outlined in International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 55000:2014151 and
NIST Special Publication 1800-5.152
• Organizations should deploy vulnerability scanning technologies that will identify vulnerable software
in line with recommendations from ISO 27001:2018.153
• As vulnerability identification capabilities mature (see Recommendation 12 on SBOMs), organizations
should be prepared to champion and adopt new technologies to enhance the speed of vulnerability
mitigation.
The Open Source Software Security Mobilization Plan,154 led by the Linux Foundation and Open Source
Security Foundation (OpenSSF), calls for industry action to develop software component frameworks
(including SBOMs) to expedite discovery of and response to future vulnerabilities like Log4j.
6. Develop the capacity to maintain an accurate IT asset and application inventory.
Maintaining an accurate technology asset and application inventory is an accepted industry-wide best practice
of cyber hygiene, and can help organizations more easily identify affected assets and applications in
responding to an incident. All organizations should maintain an accurate IT asset and application inventory,
and the Board recommends that within the U.S. government:
• the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) should take appropriate steps to ensure that federal
agencies invest in automation and tooling to establish and maintain an accurate and robust
technology asset and application inventory;
• CISA should coordinate with federal agencies to map direct and indirect software dependencies
across open and commercial software throughout the federal enterprise to improve detection and
incident response when vulnerabilities are found in software dependencies; and
• OMB, in coordination with the Office of the National Cyber Director (ONCD) and CISA, should, as the
SBOM ecosystem matures, consider issuing guidance to agencies on effectively using these asset
inventories and software metadata to improve detection and incident response during future
vulnerability response activities.
7. Organizations should have a documented vulnerability response program.
Vulnerability response is the process of investigating a potential security incident or emerging cyber threat to
take defensive or corrective action. It refers to remediating both publicly-known vulnerabilities as well as active
attacks that are under private investigation. This process differs from vulnerability disclosure and handling
processes in that it deals with vulnerabilities affecting the software that organization uses but for which it is
not the code maintainer.
• Organizations that consume software, including U.S. government agencies, should have a documented
vulnerability response program as described in Cybersecurity Incident & Vulnerability Response
Playbooks155 and ISO/IEC 27001:2018.156
• Organizations should holistically assess, aggregate, classify, and prioritize high-risk vulnerabilities for
software running on their systems.
• Organizations should increase the maturity of their vulnerability response program, especially where
they currently have limited capabilities, by setting benchmarks and measuring their efficacy over time.
8. Organizations should have a documented vulnerability disclosure and handling process.
Vulnerability disclosure and handling are the processes that define how organizations should receive and
process vulnerability reports in products or systems for which they are responsible for creating the fix. The
vulnerabilities handled in this set of processes could be in code the organization wrote or maintains, or they
could be in erroneous configurations or outdated systems the organization owns.
• Organizations, including open source projects, should assume that publicly visible code changes, code
comments, and release candidates containing security vulnerability fixes are equivalent to public
disclosure of such issues. Organizations should have plans to release security advisories concurrently,
including for any public code commits or mitigations to address security vulnerabilities.
• Organizations should prepare to receive vulnerability reports and act on them to investigate, prioritize,
and create remediations.157
• Organizations should make investments in software supply chain security, such as securing their
Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) pipeline and establishing vulnerability
coordination communication channels with supply chain partners to facilitate smoother and more
efficient vulnerability coordination.
• Organizations should measure their mean time to repair (MTTR) vulnerabilities that are reported to
them to ensure they are able to investigate and resolve vulnerabilities in code they maintain or deploy
in a timely manner.
Software developers and maintainers should be prepared to participate in vulnerability handling and
coordinated vulnerability disclosure, including participation in relevant multi-party supply chain vulnerability
coordination, per guidance in ISO 29147:2018158 and ISO 30111:2019.159 To support organizations in their
work to develop vulnerability disclosure and handling process:
• CISA should continue to encourage and, where possible, incentivize parties that discover
vulnerabilities (for example security researchers or outside developers), to disclose them to the
affected vendor or a trusted third party.
• Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Center (CERT/CC) should be given additional
personnel and other resources to facilitate increasing its current coordination capacity in anticipation
of increased ecosystem-wide software supply chain vulnerability coordination events.
9. Software developers and maintainers should implement secure software practices.
Software developers and maintainers should adopt standard practices and technologies to build secure
software in accordance with ISO 27034:2011160 and NIST’s Secure Software Development Framework.161
• Software developers and maintainers should establish a comprehensive approach to code
maintenance that encompasses consistent secure development processes, and accounts for software
security assessments and vulnerability management operations, as well as patch creation and
coordinated disclosure.
• To minimize inadvertent risk, as a best practice, code maintainers should implement communication
processes and mechanisms that provide consistent and relevant security messaging to software
package users, noting all recommended data to include in a security advisory.
• Software developers and maintainers should leverage Integrated Development Environment (IDE)
tools and add-ons for assisting in secure software development, consistent with NIST’s Secure
Software Development Framework.162
• Software developers and maintainers should also integrate source code scanning and tools that
provide software maintenance status and versions to heighten their situational awareness of
applications and software used within the environment.
BUILD A BETTER SOFTWARE ECOSYSTEM
The Log4j incident highlighted the need to evolve industry-accepted practices and technologies that lead to
software that is secure by design.
10. Open source software developers should participate in community-based security initiatives.
Given the wealth of resources now available for the development of secure open source software, developers
should engage in security uplift programs. The Board recognizes organizations should select the best
programming options for their needs, so the Board lists some options below for reference only.
• OpenSSF offers the following resources to the open source community: security training and
community resources;163 auditing services through the Alpha Omega initiative to optimize security
without increasing overhead;164 and security Scorecards,165 which allow a project to assess its risk
and security posture.
• Open Web Application Security Program (OWASP) Foundation,166 which tracks community-led open
source projects and focuses on improving the security of software, offers publicly available data
tracking the top security risks to web applications, as well as tools and resources for developers,
including education, training, and community networking.
• The Open Source Software Security Mobilization Plan has several workstreams focused on assisting
the open source community through heightened security for critical components, including code
audits, and improving the software development and build process.167
11. Invest in training software developers in secure software development.
Software developers come from a range of backgrounds and often do not have access to formal training
programs. Furthermore, students earning accredited computer science degrees or other types of certifications
generally have no requirement to conduct hands-on study of secure coding practices, nor is knowledge of
secure programming required for building software.
• The U.S. government should continue to invest in and engage with higher education institutions and
training programs by:
establishing and incentivizing cybersecurity curricula and certification programs, and
o
integrating cybersecurity modules into all computer science programs, similar to the
National Centers of Academic Excellence in Cybersecurity (NCAE-C) program (managed by
NSA, with multiple federal partners) and NIST’s cybersecurity education initiatives;168
determining a strategic approach on how to influence educational initiatives as a
o
component of a national cyber education strategy, such that recommended security
training is integrated into requirements for computer science degrees and IT
certifications. Congress should consider amendments to the Bipartisan Innovation and
Competition Act to this effect (Numerous precedents exist for more active federal
involvement in educational matters with security implications, such as the National
Research Act of 1974); and
ONCD should develop a strategic engagement strategy in collaboration with the National
o
Governor’s Association, the Education Commission of the United States, and leading
educational organizations (e.g., ABET, CSAB, AAUP, APLU, ACE, AAU, and HLC169) to
implement the above recommendations. The strategy should include recommendations
for a national cyber education strategy that incentivizes including security training into
requirements for computer science degrees and IT certifications.
• Universities and community colleges should incorporate cybersecurity training and secure
development practices as required components of computer science programming degrees and
certifications.
Accredited computer science degrees should provide training in secure coding practices
o
and cybersecurity fundamentals.
The Open Source Software Security Mobilization Plan includes a goal to secure open source software by
delivering baseline secure software development education and certification to all.170
12. Improve SBOM tooling and adoptability.
Organizations need the ability to quickly identify vulnerable software to facilitate swift response. Traceability
capabilities, such as SBOMs that can catalog the components of software, are promising possibilities, but at
present are limited. The Board anticipates future improvements in SBOM implementations and adoption, which
may enable organizations to leverage SBOMs for vulnerability management. In the meantime, the Board
recommends that:
• software developers should generate and ship SBOMs with their software, and be prepared to
incorporate improvements in the tooling and processes as they become available to the industry.
Executive Order (EO) 14028 Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity provides a roadmap for the inclusion of
SBOMs when providing software to the federal government.171
The Board also lends its support to efforts, such as The Open Source Software Security Mobilization Plan,
that advocate for SBOM improvements to create friction-free seamless tooling and training, and drive
adoption industry-wide.172
13. Increase investments in open source software security.
The U.S. government is a significant consumer and producer of open source software, and therefore should
play a role in driving security enhancements to the overall open source ecosystem.
• OMB should take appropriate steps to direct federal agency IT staff to contribute to the security and
maintenance of open source software upon which they rely, as part of their regular duties.
• ONCD, in coordination with OMB, should consider effective funding mechanisms to invest in widely
used open source software tools, and to catalyze improvements in the overall security of the open
source software ecosystem.
• NIST should engage with the open source software community to develop practical guidance on how
to most effectively apply federal policies and frameworks around secure software development for
open source software.
Private sector companies that build commercial software that includes open source libraries or dependencies
should commit financial resources toward the open source projects that they deploy. Specific examples
include:
• paying developers, security engineers, and other essential roles in supporting secure software
development, vulnerability disclosure and handling processes, and vulnerability response for open
source projects; and
• contributing funding and knowledge to centralized open source security projects.
The White House Meeting on Software Security (2022) called for software maintainers to invest in the regular
maintenance of open source software.173
14. Pilot open source software maintenance support for critical services.
The Board heard from many interviewees about the operational risks introduced to organizations because of
limitations in open source software maintenance. Open source developers are usually not paid to maintain
their software, especially not older versions that are often deployed deeply and widely across systems. Log4j
was a particularly extreme example of this. The burden of maintenance then falls to organizations that use
open source software, and can be expensive, time-consuming, and unpredictable. Organizations should be
able to project the maintenance costs of open source software, and obtain that information from a trusted
source. Funding the maintenance of critical open source software could drive a more sustainable model for
security at scale and enable timely and effective distribution of updates and mitigations.
A collaborative organization, such as Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council (CIPAC), should work
with the Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) to bring the membership of major vendors’
Product Security Incident Response Teams (PSIRTs) together with both public and private sector partners
(including OpenSSF) to pilot a collection of the most commonly included open source libraries or dependencies
that would:
• generate a critical open source package list for major industries, leveraging the PSIRTs’ data and
criteria such as OpenSSF’s Criticality Score;
• project the costs associated with managing the collection and identify funding streams from
government and private sector;
• develop and apply a framework for maintenance of packages, including protocols that are automated
where possible, to dynamically swap out old and vulnerable libraries; and
• establish security requirements and associated metrics for tracking and reporting (in tandem, this
could leverage OpenSSF’s Scorecard project and similar endeavors).
INVESTMENTS IN THE FUTURE
To address the significant challenges present in the current software ecosystem, innovative solutions will be
necessary. The Board proposes several areas for additional examination and research towards this goal.
15. Explore a baseline requirement for software transparency for federal government vendors.
The U.S. government is a significant consumer of software, and should be a driver of change in the
marketplace around requirements for software transparency.
• OMB and the Federal Acquisition Regulatory (FAR) Council should use various mechanisms to
minimize the U.S. government’s use of software without provenance and dependency information, and
should consider the use of procurement requirements, federal standards and guidelines, and
investments in automation and tooling, to create clear and achievable expectations for baseline SBOM
information.
• OMB should set a specific timeframe to achieve these goals.
16. Examine the efficacy of a Cyber Safety Reporting System (CSRS).
The U.S. government, via NIST in conjunction with CISA, should convene a public-private working group to
examine the risks, efficacy, and requirements for a potential U.S. government-run Cyber Safety Reporting
System (CSRS). Similar to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s (NASA’s) Aviation Safety
Reporting System, a CSRS could contribute to a system-wide view of the cyber ecosystem and expand and
centralize the existing external reporting and coordination of cyber safety issues.
Built on a voluntary model, a CSRS could incentivize anonymized reporting of exploitable vulnerabilities in key
libraries, software code bases, and key projects. Principles central to operation of such a system include:
• weighing how to anonymize reporting of vulnerabilities and safety defects;
• how to incentivize reporting and protocols as non-punitive; and
• determining independence and non-regulatory use of the system.
This type of system could also support federally-coordinated efforts to prioritize the identification, monitoring,
and remediation of software issues that might affect National Critical Functions—supporting systemic risk
coordination and identifying where common safety issues exist in complex operating environments across
multiple organizations, such as supply and operating chains.
As part of this examination, the working group should consider the risks associated with aggregation of
vulnerabilities and reliance on voluntary reporting of data. This working group should also consider:
• workflow of government and industry information reported via the CSRS;
• scalability and effectiveness;
• public transparency and accountability; and
• composition of any oversight function.
Lastly, the working group should aim to complete its work and make any substantive recommendations within
a six-month period following its establishment.
17. Explore the feasibility of establishing a Software Security Risk Assessment Center of Excellence
(SSRACE).
There is no centralized inventory of open source and proprietary software across federal agencies. CISA should
explore the feasibility of creating, in collaboration with the private sector, a Software Security Risk Assessment
Center of Excellence (SSRACE) to develop, manage, and protect a central inventory of all software across
federal agencies. Such an inventory would facilitate effective notification of and response to software
vulnerabilities; enhance capability for risk management; and serve as a source of data to inform systemic-level
risk assessment and drive priority of security improvement.
In parallel, the SSRACE should also advance the following efforts:
• identify the open source software used by the U.S. government to support critical mission delivery, and
advocate for funding from U.S. government grants and commercial sponsorship to support open
source software foundations to improve software safety;
• establish principles, metrics, and transparency to drive prioritization and assess improvement;
• develop performance requirements for industry-wide standard support functions vital to the rapid
operational risk assessment of vulnerable software. Advocate for existing standards (e.g., CVE,
Common Platform Enumeration (CPE), Common Configuration Enumeration (CCE)), or champion the
creation and use of new industry standards. Examples include standard naming of vulnerabilities,
software versions, development metadata; and
• identify and advocate for best practices in lifecycle management and incentives for vendors to use
code that can support timely software updates and mitigations for critical vulnerabilities.
18. Study the incentive structures required to build secure software.
Many interviewees stressed the volunteer nature of the open source software community. In light of that, the
Board recommends the U.S. government’s National Academy of Sciences Cyber Resilience Forum undertake a
study of incentive structures to build secure software. The Forum should consider:
• legal, structural, and regulatory incentives for organizations, to include, for example, the potential for
software liability reform;
• developer incentive structures that increase awareness of safety issues. For example, developers
could obtain a trust rating for their contributions through extended education on secure coding or
threat modeling. This developer rating could be a component of the software’s overall health rating;
and
• challenges to adopting incentives, including, but not limited to, resourcing and volunteer fatigue.
The Open Source Software Security Mobilization Plan proposes initial ideas to incentivize the adoption of
secure software practices such as training and badges.174
19. Establish a government-coordinated working group to improve identification of software with known
vulnerabilities.
Recognizing that the industry faces challenges with current approaches to vulnerability identification and
mitigation, NIST should convene a working group, to include private sector expertise, to determine if and how
better methods can be developed.
• This effort should include the National Science Foundation (NSF), given its vantage point into possible
academic research that exists in this area.
The working group should explore if software can become self-managed, or even self-aware, at a level of
capability where software reports, if not takes actions, based on self-identification of known vulnerabilities. The
outcome of the working group should be to try to create a standard that industry can adopt—to disrupt the
traditional vulnerability discovery and software maintenance process, which currently relies on imperfect and
incomplete scanning methods for vulnerable systems and software.
• The working group should conclude its work within three years.